In the warm air of an early-June morning, Jose Antonio Peña walks along a channel of gushing water in the Sierra Nevada of southern Spain. Traversing the rocky terrain and ducking beneath boughs of pine, he eventually reaches a grassy meadow on his left. The ancient artificial channel, known as an acequia, empties into the meadow, where its water branches into meandering streams that soak into the mountainside.

Throughout the spring thaw, Peña makes several trips a week from nearby Mecina-Bombarón – a whitewashed village on the southern slope of the mountain range – up a winding, potholed dirt road to monitor the acequia's level and flow, making adjustments as needed. The entire village depends on his actions – where the water flows now, in spring, determines where it will eventually end up when the summer comes.

For over a millennium, this acequia – from the Arabic as-saqiya, meaning "water conduit" or "water bearer" – has provided irrigation and drinking water to Mecina-Bombarón, enabling survival and agricultural prosperity in the semi-arid environment. The methods used by acequieros – people with expert skills in water catchment and allocation – to tend the channels today differ little from those used in the Middle Ages.

The channel is part of a 3,000km (1,800 mile) irrigation network built by the Moors across the Sierra Nevada between the 8th and 10th centuries. The Islamic water management techniques introduced from the east transformed the landscape and agriculture in what was then Al-Andalus. Acequias made life possible for agrarian communities, conserving and distributing scant and seasonal water resources throughout the rugged mountains. In the newly fertile conditions, the abundance of crops introduced by the Moors thrived, among them almonds, artichokes, chickpeas, aubergine (eggplant), lemons, pomegranates, spinach, quince, walnuts and watermelon.

While this ancient system is needed now more than ever, it's threatened like never before
Though ancient, this traditional water management system is sustainable, efficient and resilient.  As climate change worsens, the network will become even more important for helping communities in the Sierra Nevada cope and equitably share an increasingly scarce and unpredictable resource.

While this ancient system is needed now more than ever, it's threatened like never before. As traditional irrigation systems struggle with a lack of profitability compared with intensive agriculture and the rural exodus continues, increasingly few people still hold the skills and knowledge required to maintain acequias.

Each year, when the warmth of spring returns to the Sierra Nevada and the thaw begins, snowmelt is diverted from the headwaters of rivers into earthen, porous channels dug into the mountainside. As water flows through the gently descending acequias, ranging in length from tens of metres to kilometres, it's diverted to areas along the upper valley known as simas, where the channel empties and seeps into the ground, a process known as "sowing water". As water percolates through the subsoil, it replenishes aquifers and feeds springs and streams that emerge further down the mountain. The acequias of the Sierra Nevada are the oldest underground aquifer recharge system on the European continent, dating back more than 1,200 years.

Based on knowledge transmitted from generation to generation, acequieros like Peña understand the subterranean routes water takes. Where water is sown high in the valley determines where it eventually surfaces downslope, where it can be "harvested" to irrigate orchards, crops and gardens throughout the thirsty summer months. Without this system, most snowmelt and rain would flow quickly off the steep slopes as runoff in rivers. Sowing water slows the flow of water from the mountains, extending its availability for when it's most needed during the dry season.

Through research on sowing water, "we've found the river…has fewer peak flows and contains a more constant flow throughout the year," says Sergio Martos-Rosillo, a hydrogeologist at the Spanish Geological Survey. Research has also demonstrated how sowing water doubles the recharge of water in aquifers. The system follows the principles of ecohydrology, which uses "the regulating effect of vegetation, soil and aquifers, imitating nature to regulate water, instead of building concrete structures that alter the flow of water upstream and downstream", he says.

Water sowing and harvesting systems could be replicated in mountainous areas elsewhere in the world, where the geological and hydrological conditions are similar to those of the Sierra Nevada, Martos-Rosillo adds, noting there is interest in several Andean countries. In some areas, such systems already exist – one indigenous water management system developed independently in Peru around 1,400 years ago uses similar principles, which the government has been investing in to revive.

